:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:toc: right
:toclevels: 2

# Basic Forms

It's a recurring and important theme that Lift is secure by default. This
manifests in the way that forms are constructed as well. Form fields in Lift
are associated with a callback function that runs when the field is submitted
with the form. On the client, the field name is always unique to this page
load, and this unique field name is a cryptographically secure random value
that is associated to the callback function you specify on the server
footnote:[What about using your own field names, you may ask? You can always do
that. To access a submitted field with a given name, you can use
`S.param("field name")`. You'll get back a `Box` that will be `Full` and
contain the value you submitted if it was submitted. The `Box` will be `Empty`
if the field wasn't submitted in this request. However, be very careful about
using this method, since it exposes you to CSRF attacks.]. This makes Lift
forms resistant to many cross-site request forgery (CSRF) attacks, and
resistant to https://liftweb.net/lift_and_breach[the BREACH attack that typical
CSRF tokens are vulnerable to when served with gzip compression over a secure
connection.

Let's look at a simple example with our chat application. Currently our form
looks like this:

```
    <form class="send-message" data-lift="Chat.sendMessage">
      <label for="new-message">Post message</label>
      <input id="new-message" type="text">
      <input type="submit" value="Post">
    </form>
```

Our `sendMessage` snippet looks like this:

```
...
  def sendMessage(contents: NodeSeq) = contents
...
```

We want to bind two things above. The first is the text field, which we want to
bind so that we can get a message from the user, and the second is the submit
button, so that we can process the new message. Here's how we can do that:

```
...
import net.liftweb.http.SHtml

...
  def sendMessage = {
    var message: String = ""

    "#new-message" #> SHtml.text("", message = _) &
    "type=submit" #> SHtml.submitButton(() => {
      messageEntries ::= message
    })
  }
...
```

First things first, we're using the `SHtml` singleton. This singleton contains
Lift's form handling helpers. We're using two of them here. The first is
`SHtml.text`. This returns an `input type="text"` whose initial value is the
first parameter you pass to it. The second parameter is a function that runs
when the field is submitted. It takes in a single `String`, which is the value
the user submitted, and does something with it. In our case, we use Scala
shorthand to indicate the field's handler will just assign the value submitted
by the user to the `message` variable.

The second form helper we're using is `SHtml.submitButton`. This returns an
`input type="submit"` that runs the function you pass to it when the form is
submitted. In this case, when the form submits, we're going to prepend the
value of `message` to the existing message entries list.

Before continuing, let's change the `messages` snippet so it doesn't keep
adding a new message on each page load:

```
...
  def messages = {
    ClearClearable &
    "li *" #> messageEntries
  }
...
```

Now we can restart the server, and when we reload the page we'll be able to
post messages and see them appear on the list of entries.

So now we have a basic chat page. We've fulfilled our two initial use cases:

 - As a chatter, I want to post a message so that others can see it.
 - As a chatter, I want to see messages from me and others so that I can keep
   track of the conversation and contribute in context.

But, this clearly isn't a particularly usable chat. For one, we don't actually
know who's posting what message. For another, the current implementation of the
messages relies on a single variable that updates when a user posts to it. This
works fine when there's just one user posting a time, but once multiple users
start submitting the post form simultaneously, we start getting into serious
threading and data consistency issues.

Let's link:6-adding-usernames.adoc[deal with usernames first].
